# Data-Bootcamp-Midterm
My midterm project for Data Bootcamp class. 
===

In this notebook, I did an analysis of the video games stored in the Steam database. The notebook utilizes two APIs, one being the official Steam API and the other being Steam Spy, which allows game stats tracking that the official Steam API does not provide.

For time and testing purposes, I did not utilize one of the many unofficial Steam database .csv files available on the internet, as there are more than 110,000 games and no efficient or meaningful way to narrow down this data. As such, for the dataset used in this notebook I primarily use Steam Spy’s “top100” API method, which allows for the quick retrieval of the top 100 games by player counts in the last 2 weeks. They also have a method for  While this dataset is only 100 rows rather than 300, I believe it still presents relevant and recent data.

In this notebook, I explored questions such as:
What is the average price of each genre?
Are there quantifiable factors that correspond to rating?
How do the mean owners compare to the mean price for each genre?
Is there a relationship between price and rating?
Does release year affect average rating?

Average Price of Each Genre
	To start, I created a method, compute_avg_price_genre() which takes in a genre and a dataframe. It simply returns the mean price_usd of the dataframe. I created a list, genres_examined, and in my notebook chose to look at Action, Adventure, Massively Multiplayer, RPG, Indie, Simulation, and Casual, as these were all common genres within the top 100 games dataset. This can be easily changed if the user wishes. I then created a new dataframe to set up the genre vs average price comparison, and made a plot.
	I did this process two times, once for the average prices of the top 100 games including free games, and once excluding free games. To accomplish this, I duplicated the top100 dataframe and selected a subset where the price was greater than 0. At the time of compilation, 38 games in the top 100 were free to play and thus were removed from the data. 
Most of the genres’ averages appear to have increased by roughly $10 when excluding free games. More notably, some genres appear to have larger jumps in average price, respective to the others – namely Action, Adventure, and Massively Multiplayer. The average price point of Casual and Indie games generally appear to have similar growth in relation to one another, suggesting that a large number of games of those genres in the top 100 may have already been paid. 
Simulation, while at first having an average between Indie’s and Casual’s, catches up and even slightly surpasses Indie’s price. As for Action, Adventure, and Massively Multiplayer, most of their games are likely free to play, and this lines up with what games are most trendy at the moment; the first three games in the top 100 – CSGO, Apex Legends, PUBG – are free, along with similar player vs. player action shooters that are also popular. Strategy, while originally having the second highest average price to RPG, exceeds the RPG genre when free games are excluded.

Quantifiable Factors Corresponding to Rating
	I created a heatmap in an attempt to identify any patterns among a game’s rating, concurrent number of players, and price. Unfortunately, the numeric data available from both Steam API and Steam Spy is very limited and there may exist factors that do have strong correlations with one another. But overall, the correlation heatmap revealed that none of these three variables show a strong linear relationship – the highest correlation was between userscore and price_usd, with +0.15. The user score’s correlation with concurrent players was -0.03, and the price’s correlation with concurrent players was -0.10. Thus, we can conclude that a game’s rating and amount of players does not correlate with its price point or any numeric values, but rather the quality of the game itself and other factors unknown to us.

Mean Owners vs Mean Price Per Genre
	In this section, I aimed to determine the genres that achieved the best balance of popularity and monetization. Genres with high mean owners but low mean price would suggest the games in that genre are often mass market hits, appealing to a large audience. On the other hand, genres with low mean owners and high mean price suggests the games in that genre are niche premium games, appealing to narrower and more specific audiences.
	I utilized a method, parse_owners, which took in a string with two numbers, parsed them into integers, added them, and divided them by 2 to get the average. This was to account for Steam Spy’s formatting of a game’s average player count, in which they provide a range rather than a set number of owners, due to the difficulty of finding this data to begin with and individual player privacy settings (should users have their profile set to private, the API would not be able to determine if they owned it).
	I developed two more methods, price_vs_owners_df and plot_price_vs_owners. The first method takes in a dataframe and adds columns for mean owners, the genre (as many games have multiple genres, I selected the first and primary genre in its list), the average hours played, and calculates the mean owners per dollar. The dataframe returned is grouped by genre. The second method handles plotting this data in a bubble chart, which allows observation of each genre with respect to its mean price, its mean owners, and average playtime by bubble size/color. Again, I put these in methods to make it easier to repeat the process while excluding free games. 
	Between the two plots, Casual, Indie, and RPG games generally remained the same in terms of position and playtime. This holds with what we learned in our analysis previously, that these genres in particular do not appear to change much even after excluding free games. 
We also see how the mean price of the Simulation genre changes, and interestingly enough the average playtime drops from mid range (~100-110 hours) down to a low range (~60 hours). Thus, the free to play simulation games are likely The Adventure genre has an opposite change to that; as the average price went up, average playtime increased by ~10 hours, suggesting that while Adventure games with a higher price point are potentially more developed and have more content, the same does not appear to hold with Simulation. Between the inclusion and exclusion of free games, the mean player count of Adventure drops a fair amount, while simulation’s mean owner count increases slightly. 
	The Strategy genre’s results are interesting to look at, as despite having a decreased mean owner count as free games are dropped, its average price remains the same and playtime also remains the same. It appears that strategy players enjoy dedicating a lot of time to a single game, and there are few free strategy games in the top 100 to begin with, seeing as how the mean price for the genre barely budged at all. A similar effect can be observed with Casual games, where a majority of those games in the top 100 are likely priced low to begin with (averaging ~$5), appealing to a mass market in terms of both price and gameplay. 

Price vs Rating
	While I established in an earlier section that there was no linear relationship between price and rating, it was interesting to view the plot of these top 100 games’ prices against their ratings. There is the understanding that our dataset, being the top 100 only, can lead our interpretation to be skewed, where most of the data will be focused towards low to middle price points. Once again, around 40 of these top 100 games are free-to-play, and we can see this in the visualization. 
	Among the free to play games of the top 100, the range of ratings is immense, ranging from very low (below 50%) to very high (above 90%). Despite there being two free to play games with a rating below 50%, these games still place within the top 100 games by player count – games on Steam within the 40-69% positive reviews range are considered “Mixed” rather than “Negative”, and these games fall within the low mixed range. Thus, for these games to fall within the top 100, they both successfully appealed to a large group of customers (prompting more downloads/purchases) and retained enough of their playerbases. Games around $10 and $20 appear to have mainly positive public sentiments. 

Release Year vs Average Rating
	It is a common sentiment online nowadays that many recent games are getting worse due to a variety of factors, including price, quality of gameplay, and more. I created a graph to determine if there was any relationship between average rating and release year, and certainly enough there is a downward trend of a game’s user score as years pass. 
	The oldest games shown on this graph are often the only one in their year, and there is the implication that these games just happen to be the outliers in their year. Those games are the only ones still being played by many to this day, which itself is impressive (the oldest game is from 1998, with a user score of 96%). Due to changing times, more young people getting into video games and an overall generational shift in game preferences, the data consists of more recent games, released after 2015. Thus, this predicted decrease in game quality by year may not be entirely accurate, as we do not know about all the other games from many years ago. Regardless, this graph holds that newer doesn’t necessarily better, despite such expectations with growing technology.

Conclusion
	From this data analysis, we were able to learn about the top 100 games available on Steam. We explored how games compare by genre, average playtime, concurrent players, and price. We were able to look at which game genres made up the top 100, which can give insight regarding which genres are the most popular and competitive, and how players engage with various games over the years. As game development is a constantly growing industry, understanding of current trends from data is a huge benefit for those interested.
